



The Politics of Gun Control:
Media Coverage and Gun Control Policy
Justin Napolitano
















The Parkland shooting occurred on Valentine’s day, the 14th of February, in 2018, at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, in Parkland Florida.  Nikolas Cruz, a 19-year-old student at that school, murdered 17 and wounded another 17.  Armed with an “AR-15 style assault gun and countless magazines” this boy committed something too horrific for words.  In response, the public lamented and requested change. (New York Times, 2018)

Media coverage of the Parkland Shooting was and still is extensive.  A quick NexisUni search of “Parkland && Shooting” offers over 10,000 news results.  When controlling for newspapers of record, which I consider the New York Times, The Washington Post, and somewhat begrudgingly the Los Angeles Times, that number drops to a somewhat more reasonable 12,674 (emphasis on the sarcasm).  To further whittle this number down I wanted to create a ruled to discern coverage of the event from headlines that used the event to push a political agenda.  Unfortunately, without reading through each article, it is impossible to accomplish this.  Therefore, I’ve chosen to generalize.  The majority of these that actually detail the shooting were published between the day of the shooting, the 14th of February, and the 17th of February from what I’ve been able to gather.  Restricting the search to just those dates yielded 406 results.    A few sources provide new information around the 19th of February, or the 1st of March but most of the publications published after the 17th detail the political and social response to the shooting (Aggregate Newspaper Data).  It seems as if, when not controlling for content, but instead only searching keywords, there has been at least one story published every day since the shooting up to the current day (June 27, 2018).  I admit there is a degree of error in this set of results.  I did not review every single day since the shooting but stopped after 20.  I also did not account for duplicate stories.  



As far as the geographic spread of the coverage goes, it seems pretty much universal.  A search in LeMonde yields results. As does El Pais, El Mercurio, The Guardian, The BBC, The South China Morning Post, Izvestia, Japan Times, Al-Jazeera, and Die Zeit.  Thus, the major Francophone, German, Anglo-sphere, Spanish, Slavic, Arab, and Japanese papers of record covered the events.  I’m sure it was also covered in the Chinese, Farsi, Portuguese, Hindi, and Korean worlds as well, but I admit my ability to search databases in those languages is non-existent. 

The New York Times ran a headline, “Horror at Florida School”, on the 15th of February, and continued to publish new details about the shooting on the front page until the 18th.  By Tuesday the 20th new headlines were being published documenting, that “change will happen.”  Each of the front-page articles included a picture.  As of June 26, 2018, 386 articles have been published in the print edition of the Times and 532 published on the website; making a total of 918 articles. (ProQuest Database); (Aggregate New York Times) 

The initial length of publications in both newspapers and by the news media are fairly long.  Newspaper accounts published stories in excess of a thousand words.  Television and internet reports run in excess of one hour as much of the live coverage on the day of the shooting was dedicated to commentary and breaking news on the status of the high school and the shooter.  Around the 17th and onwards the length of the article began to decrease as the event shooting began to be tied to political and civil actions that occurred as a result of the shooting.   Despite a few special reports on the walkouts and extensive media coverage of the parkland survivors, the majority of articles and news reports shortened by the 17th or the 19th of February.  (Aggregate Newspaper Data)

The content of the articles to shifted from coverage of the event and gathering of facts, to more politically framed headlines.  Parkland shooting and Trump appear in many New York Times’ and Washington Post’s headlines.   On the other side of the spectrum the Daily News and Fox News reports failures in police training and also the lax disciplinary polices of the Florida Public School System.  The television news media channels also delivered according to the bias of their viewers.  MSNBC, CNN, CNBC in many cases appeared to follow suit with the New York Times reporting, discussion revolved about the President’s gun policy and the need for gun control Fox News reported on the politicization of the Police Chief and the Sherriff, the failure of the Broward County Superintendent to effectively discipline students, and cowardice of the Stoneman Douglas School Resource Officer. (Aggregate New York Times Data) 

	Now, ignoring the political framing found in the media discussion, the papers and the news reports agreed on a few basic facts. First the shooter was without a doubt Nikolas Cruz.  His motivations are apparently unknown; however, videos he recorded seem to imply an interest in making his name known, and also mentions an ex-girlfriend.  He purchased his ar-15 rifle legally, however there were many warning signs that should have led to its confiscation.  For instance, Cruz had been known to threaten his brother and his mother with weapons.  He also had posted a number of social media posts that were alarming, but led to no action.  The FBI had even opened an investigation; however, the file was rapidly closed.   
 	In response to these warning signs the state of Florida passed the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School Public Safety Act.  On one side, the bill raises the eligible age to purchase a rifle from 18 to 21, requires a mandatory three day waiting period for most gun sales, bans the sale of bump stocks, and creates more avenues for law enforcement to remove guns from dangerous people.  On the other side, the bill does not ban assault rifles and permits certain school officials to carry weapons on campus. (flgov.com); (Senate Bill 7026, 2018)

	The federal response has been disappointing.  Not much seems to have happened.  President Trump has proposed banning bump stocks nationally and for expanding background checks, but also is pushing for school administrators to carry guns.  Nonetheless nothing has been passed by the legislature, nor has the President signed any executive order.  As I understand it only a memo has been issued to the department of Justice.  No order has been put into action. 

The way in which the media covered the event is consistent with the expectations of the Markel and Joslyn Article (2001).  The media sought answers in order to frame blame in a direction that would satisfy political bias.  As the article itself demonstrates, political ideology and a lack of information contribute to the effectiveness of framing.  News media coverage provided only enough information to eviscerate viewers.  Then questions of blame were raised by authors and hosts.  Facts and figures were provided to support the chosen side of the argument without context by experts or survivors of the shooting.  Then blame was attributed to an overarching group, or simplified into a single issue such as gun control, or better police training.  Look to the conflicting videos, “Gun Rights Have Highest Support in 25 years” and “New Poll: Highest level of Support for Gun Control Ever”, the media definitely uses data to appeal to bias.   The result of all of this is an excessive simplification of the reality of the event.   

	 

I’d like to end this essay with one of my favorite quotes by Upton Sinclair, “All art is propaganda. It is universally and inescapably propaganda; sometimes unconsciously, but often deliberately (1925).”  No matter the source, any publication is inherently a piece of propaganda designed to support one ideal over another.  This investigation into the media resulting from the Marjory Stone Man Douglas Shooting in Parkland Florida without a doubt supports this point of view.  To accept any publication as legitimate and truthful is to me a grave mistake.  A proper analysis of media reporting is a necessary exercise for anyone that seeks to better understand the reality of any major event.  





Works Cited: 
Flgov.com Gov Rick Scott Signs Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School Public Safety Act. https://www.flgov.com/2018/03/09/gov-rick-scott-signs-marjory-stoneman-douglas-high-school-public-safety-act/. 2018
Florida State Senate Bill 7026: https://www.flsenate.gov/Session/Bill/2018/07026

MSNBC. New Poll: Highest Level of Support for Gun Control Ever https://youtu.be/FHvluhu1Oew. (2018)

Rubin Report. Gun Rights have highest Support in 25 Years.  https://youtu.be/H2UyAvkTYgk. (2018)

Robert J Spitzer. The Politics of Gun Control (1998)
Sinclair, Upton. an Essay in Economic Interpretation Ch. 2 Who Owns the Artists? Mammon Art. (1925)

Stewart, Emily. The NRA Sued to Block Florida’s New Gun Law Hours After it was Passed.
https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2018/3/10/17103874/florida-shooting-nra-gun-control-age. 2018	



